\documentclass[problem]{mcs}

\begin{pcomments}
  \pcomment{CP_planar_structural_induction}
  \pcomment{from: S09.cp7m}
\end{pcomments}

\pkeywords{
  structural_induction
  recursive_data
  planar_graphs
  planar_embeddings
}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Problem starts here
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\begin{problem}\label{planar-structural}
Prove the following assertions by structural induction on the definition
of planar embedding.

\bparts

\ppart\label{structind-twice}
In a planar embedding of a graph, each edge is traversed a total of two
times by the faces of the embedding.

\begin{solution}
\begin{proof}

The induction hypothesis is that if $\mathcal{E}$ is a planar embedding of
a graph, then each edge is traversed a total of two
times by the faces of $\mathcal{E}$.

\textbf{Base case:} There is one vertex and no edges, so this case holds vacuously.

\textbf{Constructor case:} (face-splitting) The only change is that one
face of $\mathcal{E}$ splits into two new faces, each traversing the new
edge once.

\textbf{Constructor case:} (bridge between two connected graphs) The only
change is that two faces merge into one face that makes two traversals of
the new bridging edge.  So the traversals of other edges are unchanged,
and the new edge is traversed twice by the new face.

So in any case, all edges of a planar embedding are traversed exactly
twice.  This completes the proof of the Constructor case and the proof
structural induction.

\end{proof}
\end{solution}

\ppart\label{structind-face-length} In a planar embedding of a connected
graph with at least three vertices, each face is of length at least three.

\begin{solution}
\begin{proof}
The induction hypothesis is that if $\mathcal{E}$ is a planar embedding of
a graph with at least three vertices, then all faces in $\mathcal{E}$ are
of length at least three.

\textbf{Base case:} There is one vertex, so this case holds vacuously.

\textbf{Constructor case:} (face-splitting) The new faces are of the from
$ab...a$ where the three dots indicate at least one vertex since $a$ and
$b$ are not adjacent, so both new faces are of length at least 3; no other
faces change.

\textbf{Constructor case:} (bridge between two connected graphs)

\textbf{case 1:} (both graphs have one vertex).  Connecting these graphs
with a bridge gives a graph with vertices, so this case holds vacuously.

\textbf{case 2:} (one graph has one vertex and the other has two
vertices).  Connecting these graphs with a bridge gives a line graph of
length two which has a single face of length 4.  So all faces are indeed
of length at least three.

\textbf{case 3:} (both graphs have two vertices).  Connecting these graphs
with a bridge gives a line graph of length three which has a single face
of length 6.  So all faces are indeed of length at least three.

\textbf{case 4:} (one graph has two vertices and the other has at least
three vertices).  Connecting replaces the face of the two-vertex graph and
a face of the other graph with a face of length at least $2 + 3 = 5$, and
leaves all other faces unchanged.  So all faces are indeed of length at
least three.

\textbf{case 5:} (both graphs have at least three vertices).  Connecting
replaces two faces of length at least three by a single face of length at
least $2 + 3 +3 = 7$, and leaves all other faces unchanged.  So all faces
are indeed of length at least three.

So in any case, all faces of connected planar embedding of graphs with at
least three vertices are indeed of length at least three.  This completes
the proof of the Constructor case and the structural induction.

\end{proof}

\end{solution}

\eparts
\end{problem}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Problem ends here
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\endinput
