
\section{Coping with Infinity}\label{infinite_expect_sec}

\subsection{Repeating Yourself}
Making independent tosses of a fair coin until some desired pattern
comes up is a simple process you should feel solidly in command of,
right?  So how about a bet about the simplest such process: flip until
a head comes up?  Ok, you're wary of betting with us, but how about
this: we'll let \emph{you set the odds}.

Here's the bet: you make independent tosses of a fair coin until a
head comes up.  Then you will repeat the process until another head
comes up.  If the second head has not come up in the same or fewer
tosses than the first one, you can stop tossing because you win!  But
if a second head does come up sooner than the first, you have to start
over trying to flip at least as many times as the first time.  You
keep starting over until you finally repeat a run of tails at least as
long as your first one.  Another way to say this is that you will keep
tossing until you repeat a run of tails that is as long as your first
one.  So each head that appears after the first one corresponds to
``starting over.''  The payment rules are that you will pay me \$1
each time you start over, and I will pay you some generous amount when
you win by finally repeat your first run of tails.

For example, if you first flip \texttt{TTTH}, then you will keep
flipping until you get another run of four tails.  So your winning
flips might be
\[
\texttt{TTTHTHTTHHTTHTHTTHTHHHTTT}.
\]
This run has 10 heads, so you've started over 9 times and would have
paid me \$9.  But now you've won, and I'll pay you generously ---how
does \$20 sound?  Maybe you'd rather have \$100?
